---
title: Problem set 2
duedate: October 14th
layout: default
---

Question 1
====
(3 points)

For $$R$$ a commutative ring, recall that the power series ring $$R[[x]]$$ has as elements formal sums (possibly infinite) $$a_0+a_1x+a_2x+\cdots$$, with $$a_i\in R$$, that add and multiply as you expect.

1. Show that $$(1-x)$$ is a unit in $$\mathbb{Z}[[x]]$$, with inverse $$1+x+x^2+x^3+\cdots$$
2. Let $$R$$ be a commutative ring.  Show that $$r=a_0+a_1x+a_2x^2+\cdots \in R[[x]]$$ is a unit in $$R[[x]]$$ if and only if $$a_0$$ is a unit in $$R$$.
3. Let $$R$$ be a commutative ring, $$r\in R$$ a nilpotent element.  Prove that $$1+r$$ is a unit in $$R$$.

Question 2
====
(2 points)

1. Let $$R$$ be a commutative ring, and $$r\in R$$.  Show that multiplication by $$r$$, $$m_r:R \to R$$ defined by $$m_r(s)=r\cdot s$$ is a homomorphism of abelian groups.
2. Let $$R$$ be a finite, nontrivial commutative ring.  Prove that every nonzero element is either a unit or a zero divisor. (Part 1, and idea of kernels from group theory, might help).


A non-finitely generated subring of a finitely generated ring
====

In the next two questions, we construct an example of a finitely generated ring $$R$$, and a subring $$S\subset R$$ that is *not* finitely generated.

Question 3: the easy part
====
(2 points)

1. Show that $$\mathbb{Z}[x]$$ is finitely generated.
2. Define $$S\subset{Z}[x]$$ by

$$S=\{a_0+a_1x+a_2x^2+\cdots+a_nx^n \text{ such that } a_i \text{ is even for } i\geq 1\}$$

Show that $$S\subset\mathbb{Z}[x]$$ is a subring.

Question 4: The hard part
===
(3 points)

We claim that $$S\subset \mathbb{Z}[x]$$ is *not* finitely generated; this requires a little more work to prove.  We do this as follows: we construct a surjective homomorphism $$\varphi:(S, +)\to V$$, where $$V$$ is an infinite group.  We then show that if $$S$$ were finitely generated, the image of $$\varphi$$ would be finite, a contradiction.

Define $$V$$ to the group of infinite sequences $$(g_1, g_2,\cdots, g_n, \cdots, )$$, with $$g_i\in\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$$ and only finitely many $$g_i\neq 0$$.

Suppose that $$f=a_0+a_1x+\cdots + a_nx^n\in S$$.  Since for $$i\geq 1, a_i$$ is even, we may write $$f=a_0+2b_1x+\cdots + 2b_nx^n$$, with $$b_i\in\mathbb{Z}$$.


Define a map $$\varphi:S\to V$$ by 

$$\varphi(a_0+2b_1x+2b_2x^2+2b_3x^3+\cdots 2b_nx^n)=([b_1], [b_2], [b_3],\cdots, [b_n],0,0,0,\dots)$$

So, for example, we have $$\varphi(3-2x+4x^2+6x^4)=(1,0,0,1,0,0,0,\dots)$$

3. Prove that $$\varphi$$ is a surjective map of abelian groups from $$(S,+)$$ to $$V$$.

4. Now suppose that $$s_1,s_2\in S$$; show that $$\varphi(s_1\cdot s_2)\in\{0, s_1, s_2, s_1+s_2\}$$.  (Hint: write $$s_1=a_0+2xf_1$$, where $$a_0$$ is the constant term of $$s_1$$ and $$2xf_1$$ is the rest of $$s_1$$, write $$s_2$$ similarly)

5. Now show that if $$S$$ were finitely generated by polynomials $$P_1,\cdots, P_M$$, then the image of $$\varphi(S)$$ would have size at most $$2^M$$, given by the elements $$A_I\in  V$$, where $$I\subset\{1,\dots, M\}$$ and

$$A_I=\sum_{i\in I} \varphi(P_i)$$ 

Conclude that $$S$$ is not finitely generated
