---
title: Problem Set 5
duedate: 2nd November
layout: default
---




Question 1: Old dog, new tricks (3 marks)
===

Let $$\mathbb{F}_2$$ be the field with two elements.  We saw last week that if $$R=\mathbb{F}_2[x]/(x^2)$$, and $$S=\mathbb{F}_2[y]/(y^2+1)$$, then $$R\cong S$$.

Give another proof using the universal property of polynomial rings and the universal property of quotient rings.  That is, using these universal properties, construct maps $$\psi:R\to S$$ and $$\varphi:S\to R$$ and show they are inverse.


Question 2: Ideals in $$\mathbb{C}[x,y]$$ (3 marks)
======

Determine whether each of the following ideals in $$\mathbb{C}[x,y]$$ is prime, maximal, and/or radical.

1. $$I=(y-1)$$
2. $$J=(x-\pi i, y)$$
3. $$K=(x^2+y^2, x^2-y^2)$$





Question 3: Ideals requiring many generators (4 marks)
=====

Since $$\mathbb{C}[x,y]$$ is Noetherian, we know that every ideal is finitely generated.  This exercise shows that there is no upper bound on the number of generators needed, unlike $$\mathbb{C}[x]$$, where every ideal is generated by a single element.

Define the total degree of a monomial $$x^ky^\ell$$ to be $$k+\ell$$.  Let $$\mathfrak{m}^n$$ be the $$\mathbb{C}$$-span of all monomials of total degree at least $$n$$, i.e. 

$$\mathfrak{m}^n=\{\sum a_i x^{k_i}y^{\ell_i} : a_i\in\mathbb{C}, k_i+\ell_i\geq n\}$$

It is easy to see that $$\mathfrak{m}^n$$ is an ideal, and that $$\mathfrak{m}^{n+1}\subset \mathfrak{m}^n$$.


1. Give, with proof, a set of size $$n+1$$ that generates $$\mathfrak{m}^n$$ as an ideal
2. Prove that $$\mathfrak{m}^{n+1}$$ cannot be generated by less than $$n+1$$ elements.

Hint: Suppose that $$\mathfrak{m}^n$$ was generated by $$r_1,\dots, r_k$$.  Consider the $$\mathbb{C}$$-vector space $$\mathfrak{m}^n/\mathfrak{m}^{n+1}$$, and show that the images $$\overline{r}_i\in\mathfrak{m}^n/\mathfrak{m}^{n+1}$$ span this vector space.  

