---
title: Problem Set 9
duedate: 7th December
layout: default
---

Question 1 (3 points):
====
The *nodal cubic* is the algebraic set $$X=V(y^2-x^3-x^2)$$.  

1. Sketch the real part of $$X$$, by considering how it is related to the graph of $$y=x^3+x^2$$.
2. Show that the map $$\varphi:\mathbb{A}_{\mathbb{C}}^1\to \mathbb{A}^2_{\mathbb{C}}$$ given by $$\varphi(t)=(t^2-1, t^3-t)$$ lands inside $$X$$.
3. Show that the map $$\varphi$$ is surjective onto $$X$$.  Where does $$\varphi$$ fail to be injective?


Note (not necessary to do the problem, but fun and perhaps enlightening)
----- 
The map $$\varphi$$ has the following geometric interpretation, which may be enlightening.  Consider the line through the origin with slope $$t$$, i.e., $$y=tx$$.  If we restrict $$y^2-x^3-x^2$$ to this line, it will be a cubic polynomial in one variable, and hence have three roots.  The origin will always be a double root, and hence there will be one more root.  Geometrically, this means the line $$y=tx$$ intersects $$X$$ at the origin with multiplicity two, and at one *other* point.  This other point is $$h(t)$$.  




Question 2 (3 points): 
====
Let $$k$$ be an algebraic closed field, and let $$X\subset \mathbb{A}^n_k$$ and $$Y\subset \mathbb{A}^m_k$$ be algebraic sets.  Let $$\varphi:X\to Y$$ be a polynomial map and let $$\varphi^*:k[Y]\to k[X]$$ be the corresponding map between coordinate rings.

1. Prove that if $$\varphi$$ is surjective, then $$\varphi^*$$ is injective.
2. Prove that if $$\varphi^*$$ is surjective, then $$\varphi$$ is injective.
3. Show that the converses of point 1 and 2 don't hold. (Hint: consider the map $$V(xy-1)\to \mathbb{A}_k^1$$ given by $$(a,b)\mapsto a$$)

Hints: Two points are different iff there is a polynomial that takes on different values at p and q.  Two polynomials are the same iff they take on the same value at every point.  For 3, one of the examples from the previous homework may help...

Question 3 (4 points):
====

Let $$G=\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$$, and let $$g\in G$$ be a generator.  Let $$\omega=\exp(2\pi i / n)\in\mathbb{C}$$ be a primitive $$n$$th root of unity.  Let $$G$$ act on $$\mathbb{C}^2$$ by $$g\cdot(x,y)=(\omega x,\omega^{-1}y)$$, and on $$\mathbb{C}[x,y]$$ in the same way.

1. Let
$$\mathbb{C}[x,y]^G=\{f\in \mathbb{C}[x,y] : g\cdot f=f \;\forall g\in G\}.$$
Prove that $$\mathbb{C}[x,y]^G$$ is the $$\mathbb{C}$$-subalgebra of $$\mathbb{C}[x,y]$$ generated by $$x^n, y^n$$ and $$xy$$.
2. Using Part 1, prove that $$\mathbb{C}[x,y]^G\cong \mathbb{C}[u,v,w]/(uv-w^n)$$ (Hint: as usual, the division algorithm may help) 
3. The inclusion map $$i:\mathbb{C}[x,y]^G\to\mathbb{C}[x,y]$$ corresponds to some polynomial map $$p:\mathbb{A}^2_{\mathbb{C}}\to V(w^n-uv)\subset \mathbb{A}^3_{\mathbb{C}}$$ -- trace through the correspondence to determine explicitly the map $$p$$.
4. If $$a,b\in \mathbb{A}^2_{\mathbb{C}}$$, prove that $$p(a)=p(b)$$ if and only if $$a=g\cdot b$$ for some $$g\in G$$.  

Thus, we see that $$V(uv-w^n)$$ is the quotient $$\mathbb{A}^2_{\mathbb{C}}/G$$.


