---
title: Problem set 10
duedate: December 17
layout: default
---

Problem 1
====
(5 points)

Suppose that $$X\subset \mathbb{A}_\mathbb{C}^m, Y\subset\mathbb{A}_{\mathbb{C}}^n$$ be algebraic subsets, and let $$\varphi:X\to Y$$ a polynomial map.

Part 1: If $$W\subset Y$$ is an algebraic subset, show that 

$$\varphi^{-1}(W)=\{x\in X \text{ such that } \varphi(x)\in W\}\subset X$$ 

is an algebraic subset.

Part 2: Suppose that $$\varphi$$ is surjective, and that $$X$$ is irreducible.  Prove that $$Y$$ is irreducible.  (hint: Part 1).

Part 3: Show that $$V\subset X$$ is an algebraic subset, then $$\varphi(V)\subset Y$$ need not be algebraic.  (Hint: Consider $$V(xy-1)\subset \mathbb{A}^2_{\mathbb{C}}$$, with $$\varphi$$ projection onto the $$x$$ coordinate.


Problem 2
===
(5 points)

Let $$X=Y=\mathbb{A}^1_{\mathbb{C}}$$, and consider the map $$\varphi:X\to Y$$ given by $$\varphi(x)=x^2+4x$$.

1. Show every point except one in $$Y$$ has two distinct preimages, and that the remaining point has only one preimage.
2. Write down the corresponding ring map $$\varphi^*:k[Y]\to k[X]$$ 
3. Let $$f:R\to S$$ be a ring homomorphism; and $$I\subset R$$ an ideal.  The *extension* of $$I$$ by $$f$$ is the ideal $$\langle f(I)\rangle \subset S$$, i.e., the ideal generated by the images of all elements in $$I$$.  Show that when $$c\in Y$$ has two preimages under $$\varphi$$, the extension of the maximal ideal $$(y-c)$$ corresponding to $$c$$ by the map $$\varphi^*$$ is radical and is the intersection of two prime ideals.  
4. Show that the extension of the maximal ideal corresponding to the point with only one preimage is not radical, and is contained in a unique prime ideal.





