---
layout: lecture
title: Lecture 10&#58; Types of ideals
Comments: True
---
 
We began with a brief discussion of a couple of problems from Problem set 3 that people had had difficulty on.


Types of Ideals
----

When we considered quotients of the polynomial ring $$\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}[x]/(x^2+1)$$, we found it was a field with 9 elements, while the ring $$\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}[x]/(x^2)$$ isn't even reduced.  

It would be nice to be able to construct all finite fields in this way, which would require knowing when $$\mathbb{Z}_p\mathbb{Z}[x]/(f)$$ was a field.  

More generally, given a ring $$R$$ and an ideal $$I\subset R$$, we would like to know when $$R/I$$ is *nice*; that is, reduced, an integral domain, or a field.

It turns out the first two of these are easy to answer, the third is slightly more difficult.

When is $$R/I$$ reduced?
----

Recall that a ring is reduced if it is no nilpotent elements.  One convenient way to state this is that being reduced means $$a^n=0$$ implies that $$a=0$$.

By writing down what these means in $$R/I$$ and ``lifting'' it to $$R$$, we immediately get a criterion on $$I$$ that guarantees that $$R/I$$ is reduced.

Specifically, since $$[a]^n=0_{R/I}$$ is equivalent to $$a^n\in I$$, and $$[a]=0$$ is equivalent to $$a\in I$$, we have that the following are equivalent:

$$\left([a]^n=0_{R/I}\implies [a]=0_{R/I}\right)\Longleftrightarrow  \left( a^n\in I \implies a\in I\right)$$

Summarizing, we have

Definition
====

An ideal $$I$$ is *radical* if $$a^n\in I$$ implies that $$a\in I$$.

Lemma
====

An ideal $$I\subset R$$ is radical if and only if $$R/I$$ is reduced $$\quad\square$$

Remark
===
The name *radical* is for the square root (or $$n$$th root symbol) $$\sqrt{}$$.  In homework, we showed that in any ring the set of all nilpotent elements is an ideal.  An analogous argument (essentially, the same argument applied to $$R/I$$ shows that for any ideal $$I$$, there is a smallest radical ideal containing $$I$$, denoted $$\sqrt{I}$$.



When is $$R/I$$ an integral domain?
----
A condition guaranteeing that $$R/I$$ is an integral domain can be derived exactly how we found a condition for $$R/I$$ to be reduced.

Recall a ring is an integral domain if it has no zero divisors.  One convenient way of stating this is that $$ab\in I$$ implies that $$a\in I$$ or $$b\in I$$.

For $$R/I$$ to be an integral domain, then, means that $$[a]\cdot [b]=[0]$$ implies that $$[a]=0$$ or $$[b]=0$$.  Lifting to $$R$$, this is equivalent to $$a\cdot b \in I$$ implies that $$a\in I$$ or $$b\in I$$.

Thus, we are led to 

Definition
===
An ideal $$I$$ is called *prime* if $$ab\in I$$ implies that $$a\in I$$ or $$b\in I$$.

Lemma
===
An ideal $$I\subset R$$ is prime if and only if $$R/I$$ is an integral domain $$\quad\square $$


Remark
===

The name *prime* comes from primes in the integers; if $$k\in \mathbb{Z}$$, then the $$(k)$$, the ideal generated by $$k$$, is prime if and only if $$k$$ is prime; if $$k$$ is prime, then

$$ab\in (k) \Longleftrightarrow k | ab \Longleftrightarrow k|a \textrm{ or } k|b \Longleftrightarrow a\in (k) \textrm{ or } b\in (k)$$

Furthermore, the middle equivalence holds exactly when $$k$$ is prime (or 0), and so the only prime ideals of $$\mathbb{Z}$$ are the primes and 0.

When is $$R/I$$ a field?
---

It is only slightly more complicated to determine when $$R/I$$ is a field; recall that $$R/I$$ is a field if and only if it has no ideals other than 0 and $$R/I$$. This will translate into there being no ideals containing $$I$$ except for $$I$$ itself, and all of $$R$$.

Definition
===

Recall that an ideal is $$I$$ is *proper* if it is not all of $$R$$.

An ideal $$I$$ is called *maximal* if the only proper ideal containing $$I$$ is $$I$$ itself; that is, if $$I\subset J$$, with $$J$$ a proper ideal, then $$I=J$$.

Lemma
===

The ring $$R/I$$ is a field if and only if $$I$$ is a maximal ideal.



Ideals in $$\mathbb{Z}$$
--------

It is worthwhile to determine which ideals in $$\mathbb{Z}$$ are reduced, prime, and maximal.

Lemma
===

The ideal $$(k)$$ is reduced if and only if $$k$$ is square free; that is, $$k=P_1\cdot p_2\cdots p_\ell$$, with the $$p_i$$ distinct primes.

Proof
===

First we show that being square free is a necessary condition for $$I$$ to be reduced.

Suppose that $$k=p_1^{e_1}\cdot p_2^{e_2}\cdots p_\ell^{e_\ell}$$, with one of the $$e_i>1$$.  Then consider $$a=p_1\cdot p_2\cdot p_\ell$$.  Since $$a$$ is not divisible by $$k$$, we have that $$a\notin (k)$$.  But if we let $$f=\text{max}(e_i)$$, then $$a^f$$ is divible by $$k$$, and so $$a^f\in (k)$$, and $$(k)$$ is not radical.

On the other hand, if $$k=p_1\cdots p_\ell$$ is square free, then 

$$a^n\in (k)\Longleftrightarrow k | a^n \Longleftrightarrow p_1\cdots p_\ell | a^n\Longleftrightarrow p_i | a^n\forall i$$ 

where we haven't used $$p_i$$ is prime yet.  Now, since $$p_i$$ is prime

$$p_i | a^n \Longleftrightarrow p_i | a$$

and so working backwards, we have $$a^n\in (k)$$ if and only if $$a\in (k)$$, and so $$(k)$$ is radical.  $$\quad\square$$

We have seen that the prime ideals in $$\mathbb{Z}$$ and $$(0)$$ and $$(p)$$, for $$p$$ prime.  Since $$\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$$ is a field, the ideals $$(p)$$ are maximal.  However, $$\mathbb{Z}/0\mathbb{Z}=\mathbb{Z}$$ is not a field, and so $$(0)$$ is the only prime ideal of $$\mathbb{Z}$$ that is not maximal.





