---
layout: lecture
title: Lecture 3&#58; Roadmap.  Types of elements
Comments: True
---

In this lecture, we start with an overview and motivation for what we will be doing the next three weeks: constructing new rings from old in terms of generators and relations, and analogies with group theory 

We then briefly discuss three types of elements of rings: units, zero divisors, and nilpotent elements.

Motivation and road map
----

As motivation in the first lecture, we discussed the use of rings of the form $$\mathbb{Z}[\zeta]$$, where $$\mathbb{z}\in \mathbb{C}$$ was a primitive $$n$$th root of unity; that is, $$\zeta^n=1$$, but $$\zeta$$ to any lower power was not equal to one.

Similarly, subrings of the form $$\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{D}]\subset \mathbb{R}$$ also play an important role in number theory.

These rings are all subrings of $$\mathbb{C}$$; we will want some ways to deal with subrings, and will discuss that tomorrow.  

But there are very similar rings that are *not* subrings of a ring we know.  For example, the construction of the complex numbers $$\mathbb{C}$$ as $$\mathbb{R}[i]$$, where $$i^2=-1$$.  If we're constructing $$\mathbb{C}$$, we can't start with working as a subring of anything.  Similarly, in $$\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}$$, we have $$0^2=0, 1^2=1, 2^2=4=1$$, and so there is no $$\sqrt{2}$$.  We might like to construct a new ring by adding a square root of 2 to $$\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}$$, but right now we don't have a way to do that.

In short, we'd like to build rings in terms of generators and relations, the same way groups are built out of generators and relations.  For example, if $$D_4$$ denotes the symmetry group of the square, then it may be written

$$D_4=\left\langle r,f \text{ such that } r^4=f^2=1, rf=fr^3\right\rangle$$

That is, it is generated by two elements $$r, f$$ (rotation and flip, respectively), and these elements satisfy the relations given on the second line.

We will accomplish these through the notion of *ideals*

An analogy with group theory
=====

The theory of ideals we will spend the next few weeks developing is similar to the role of normal subgroups from group theory.  Normal subgroups are usually defined as those which are closed under conjugation, but the important thing about them are they are precisely the subgroups that are kernels of homomorphisms.  If $$\varphi:G\to H$$ is any homomorphism, then $$\ker \varphi$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$.  More importantly; given any normal subgroup $$N\trianglelefteq G$$, we can form the quotient group $$G/N$$, and we get a surjective quotient map $$\varphi:G\to G/N$$, that has $$N$$ as its kernel.  

These facts are usually packagedand summarized in various ``isomorphism theorems'' -- our goal for the next two weeks 

First, we must introduce ideals and homomorphisms, which will happen next week; then we will introduce quotient rings, and prove the isomorphism theorems.

$$
\begin{array}{cc} \text{Group Theory} & \text{Ring Theory} \\
\hline
N\trianglelefteq G \text{ normal subgroup } & \mathcal{I}\subset R \text{ ideal } \\
\varphi:G\to G/N & \varphi:R\to R/\mathcal{I} \\
\ker(\varphi)=N & \ker(\varphi)=\mathcal{I}


\end{array}
$$








Three types of elements
----

Definition
====

Let $$R$$ be a commutative ring.  We say a nonzero element of $$r\in R$$ is

1. A *unit*, if there exists $$s\in R$$ with $$r\cdot s=1$$.
2. A *zero divisor* if there exists $$s\in R, s\neq 0$$ with $$r\cdot s=0$$
3. *Nilpotent* if there exists a postive integer $$n$$ with $$r^n=0$$

Remark
===
You have to be slightly careful about whether you want to consider $$0$$ to be nilpotent or a zero-divisor.


Example: $$\mathbb{Z}/12\mathbb{Z}$$
===
Let us classify which elements of $$\mathbb{Z}/12\mathbb{Z}$$ are units, zero divisors, or nilpotent.

For $$[k]$$ to be a zero divisor, we need $$[k]\neq 0$$, and so 12 doesn't divide $$k$$, and we need another nonzero element $$[\ell]$$ with $$[k]\cdot [\ell]=0$$.  Thus, we need that 12 doesn't divide $$\ell$$ or $$k$$, but it does divide $$k\cdot \ell$$.  We see that if $$k$$ has a common factor $$f$$ with 12, say, $$k=f\cdot q$$, then $$[k]$$ is a zero divisor, because 

$$[k]\cdot [12/f]=[fq\cdot 12/f]=[12q]=0$$

So, 2,3,4,6,8,9,10 are all zero divisors in $$\mathbb{Z}/12\mathbb{Z}$$.

On the other hand, if $$k$$ does not have a common factor with 12, then by the Euclidean Algorithm we can find $$a, b\in \mathbb{Z}$$ with $$ak+12b=1$$, and hence $$ak=1-12b$$, and so $$[a]\cdot [k]=[1]$$ in $$\mathbb{Z}/12\mathbb{Z}$$ and $$k$$ is a unit in $$\mathbb{Z}/12{Z}$$.  

So 1,5,7,11 are all units in $$\mathbb{Z}/12\mathbb{Z}$$.

To see if $$[k]$$ is nilpotent, we can repeatedly multiply $$k$$ by itself and see what happens -- it turns out only $$[6]$$ is nilpotent, since $$6^2=36 \quad\square$$

In general, an element does not have to be of any of these three types -- for example, in $$\mathbb{Z}$$, there are no zero divisors or nilpotent elements, but the only units are $$\pm 1$$.

Lemma
====

Every nilpotent element is a zero divisor.

Proof
====

Suppose that $$r\in R$$ is a nilpotent element.  Then there is some *minimal* $$n>1$$ so that $$r^n=0$$ but $$r^{n-1}\neq 0$$.  Then $$r\cdot r^{n-1}=r^n=0$$, and so $$r$$ is a zero divisor. $$\quad\square$$

