---
layout: lecture
title: Lecture 12&#58; Polynomial Algebras
Comments: True
---
 
After a week break, we began with a quick review of where we had left off.

Polynomial Algebras
----

The polynomial ring in $$n$$ variables with coefficients in $$R[x_1,x_2,\dots,x_n]$$ is the most important.

Note:  $$R[x,y]=R[x][y]$$
===

We have natural isomorphisms 

$$R[x,y]\cong \left(R[x]\right)[y]\cong \left(R[y]\right)[x]$$

that is, the polynomial ring over $$R$$ in two variables $$x,y$$ is isomorphic to the poylnomial ring over $$R[x]$$ in one variable $$y$$.

This just amounts to the order we expand the our variables in terms of.  For instance, consider the element $$f=x^3y^2+xy+xy^2\in R[x,y]$$.  To consider $$f$$ as an element of $$\left(R[x]\right)[y]$$, we think of it as a polynomial in $$y$$ with coefficients in $$R[x]$$, that is, we write $$f=(x^3+x^2)\cdot y^2+x\cdot y$$.  Similarly, to view it as an element of $$\left(R[y]\right)[x]$$, we write $$f=y^2\cdot x^2+(y^2+y)\cdot x$$.

Why is $$R[x_1,\dots, x_n]$$ so important?
===

The polynomial algebra is important because it is the *free $$R$$-algebra on $4n$$ generators.

Intuitively, what this means is that it is generated by $$n$$ element -- namely, the variables $$R[x_1,\dots, x_n]=\langle x_1,\dots,x_n\rangle$$, which is clear.  Furthermore, there are *no relations* among the $$x_i$$ -- every element of $$R[x_1,\dots, x_n]$$ can be written *uniquely* in terms of the $$x_i$$.

More formally, this can be expressed in terms of a universal property.

Proposition
===

The polynomial ring $$R[x_1,\dots, x_n]$$ satisfies the following universal property in the category of $$R$$ algebras:  for any $$R$$-algebra $$S$$, and any $$n$$-tuple $$s_1,\dots, s_n$$ of elements of $$S$$, there exists a unique morphism $$\varphi:R[x_1,\dots, x_n]\to S$$ of $$R$$-algebras so that $$\varphi(x_i)=s_i$$.

Proof:
===

We give a proof for $$n=1$$ for notational convenience; the general proof is basically the same.

First, we show the uniqueness: there there is only one $$R$$-algebra map $$\varphi:R[x] \to S$$ with $$\varphi(x_i)=s$$.  To see this, we will show that for any polynomial $$f=a_0+a_1x+a_2x^2+\cdots +a_nx^n$$, the value $$\varphi(f)$$ is determined by $$\varphi(x)=s$$ and the fact that $$\varphi$$ is an $$R$$-algebra morphism.

Since $$\varphi$$ is a ring homomorphism, it preserves addition and multiplication, and so we have

$$\varphi(f)=\varphi(a_0+a_1x+a_2x^2+\cdots +a_nx^n)=\varphi(a_0)+\varphi(a_1)\varphi(x)+\varphi(a_2)\varphi(x)^2+\cdots +\varphi(a_n)x^n$$

Now, by assumption, we have that $$\varphi(x)=s$$, and so that value is determined.  Similarly, since $$a_i\in R$$, and $$\varphi$$ is an $$R$$-algebra homomorphism, the value of $$\varphi(a_i)$$ is determined.  

If $$R$$ is a field, then there will be a copy of $$R\subset S$$, and $$\varphi$$ must map one copy of $$R$$ to the other.  More generally, there will just be an *image* of $$R$$ under the structure map $$\psi:R\to S$$ that $$S$$ has an $$R$$-algebra, and we must have $$\varphi(a_i)=\psi(a_i)$$; in any case, the value $$\varphi(a_i)$$ is determined because $$\psi$$ is an $$R$$-algebra morphism.

Note that, in case $$R$$ is a field, $$\varphi$$ has the form 

$$\varphi(f)=a_0+a_1s+a_2s^2+\cdots+a_ns^n=f(s)$$

that is, $$f$$ is the evaluation map at $$s$$.  

To see existence, we need to show that the evaluation map is in fact a morphism of algebras -- that is $$(f\cdot g)(s)=f(s)\cdot g(s), (f+g)(s)=f(s)+g(s)$$; this is routine.  $$\quad\square$$

Example: Maps $$\mathbb{Z}[x]\to\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$$
===

Since every ring is a $$\mathbb{Z}$$ algebra in a unique way, from the universal property we see that there are two maps from $$\mathbb{Z}[x]\to \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$$, one with $$x\mapsto 0$$ and one with $$x\mapsto 1$$.  

We the first map sends $$a_0+a_1x+\cdots+a_nx^n$$ to $$[a_0]$$, the second sends $$a_0+a_1x+\cdots+a_nx^n$$ to $$[a_0+a_1+\cdots+a_n]$$.  Note that the structure map $$\psi:\mathbb{Z}\to\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$$ is just $$\psi(k)=[k]$$, and so the map guaranteed by the universal property is the evaluation map together with the structure map.







